---
title: "JPubE — Target-based GDP Manipulation: Evidence from China"
date: 2025-03-07T18:00:00+08:00
category: { name: "Research Notes", slug: research }
tags: ["HIBL"]
summary: "Chinese local governments manipulate data to meet GDP growth targets."
---

This paper investigates the phenomenon of GDP manipulation by local governments in China, employing a ratio-form approach and **Bunching Estimation** to quantify the extent of target-driven GDP manipulation. The analysis reveals that approximately **9.59% of observations** at China’s prefecture level between 2000 and 2018 experienced target-driven GDP manipulation, leading to an average annual overestimation of the GDP growth rate by **0.24 percentage points**. After 2013, the weakening of the GDP-centric performance evaluation and the adoption of softer target-setting significantly curtailed such manipulation. The study recommends further promoting **soft target setting** and **reforming the official performance appraisal system** to reduce the incentives for GDP data falsification.

**Paper Title:** Target-based GDP manipulation: Evidence from China

**Journal:** *[Journal of Public Economics](https://www.sciencedirect.com/journal/journal-of-public-economics)*

**Authors:**

- <u>Binlei Gong</u>：Qiushi Distinguished Professor, Associate Dean of the School of Public Affairs, Zhejiang University; Changjiang Distinguished Professor of the Ministry of Education; Chief Expert of a Major Project of the National Social Science Fund and a major special project of the Ministry of Education. His research spans development economics, agricultural economics, and public management, focusing on macroeconomic issues, the “Three Rural Issues” (agriculture, rural areas, and farmers), policy topics in resource and environment, with a particular emphasis on the interplay of “technology-institution-environment” on coordinated urban-rural and industrial-agricultural development.
- <u>Yuhui Shen</u>：Master’s student at the School of Public Affairs, Zhejiang University.
- <u>Shuai Chen</u>：Ph.D. from Peking University; tenured professor and doctoral supervisor at Zhejiang University; Young Changjiang Scholar of the Ministry of Education; Chief Expert of a Major Project of the National Social Science Fund. He is affiliated with the China Academy for Rural Development (CARD) and the Department of Agricultural Economics and Management, School of Public Affairs, Zhejiang University, where he serves as Deputy Director of the Institute of Agricultural and Rural Development and Vice Chair of the Department of Agricultural Economics. His teaching includes Intermediate Econometrics, Resource and Environmental Economics, and Introduction to Research Methods in Agricultural Economics. His research interests are agricultural economics, resource and environmental economics, and development economics, focusing on topics like climate change and Chinese agriculture, and the socio-economic impacts of air pollution.

**Available online:** 6 March 2025

<br/>

## Long Summary

This paper focuses on the phenomenon where Chinese local governments **manipulate** statistical data to meet **pre-set GDP growth targets**, terming this “**target-driven GDP manipulation**.” The authors ground their analysis in **principal-agent theory**: within governmental hierarchies, a superior (the principal) finds it difficult to promptly and accurately supervise the actions of a subordinate (the agent), leading to hidden actions like data falsification under **information asymmetry**. As one of the most crucial macroeconomic indicators, GDP, once manipulated, not only misguides the assessment of the current economic situation but may also influence future policy decisions, causing resource misallocation and erroneous policy recommendations. Studying the motivation and extent of GDP data manipulation is therefore of profound significance.

The research motivation originates from several data falsification scandals both domestically and internationally. Internationally, it is not uncommon for governments to tamper with official GDP statistics to meet specific targets. For instance, to satisfy EU accession or fiscal criteria, Turkey and Greece reported abnormally high GDP growth rates in the early 2000s. Such cases have raised deep-seated doubts about government data credibility. In China, since its economic aggregate became the world’s second largest after 2010, both domestic and international attention to the accuracy of Chinese official statistics has grown keenly. Studies suggest that economic competition among Chinese local governments has often resulted in top-down target “**ratcheting**”—a higher government sets a relatively high growth target, and lower-level governments, striving not to lag, further increase their targets. This competitive environment can tempt local officials to exaggerate economic growth figures to meet targets. Despite repeated rejection of data falsification by China’s central government, statistical inaccuracies still appear frequently. In recent years, at least three provinces have admitted to inflating their GDP data. When researchers compared regional actual GDP growth rates with target rates, they found that many regions conveniently achieved rates exactly 'on the line', suggesting suspected manipulation.

Given this background, this paper zeroes in on **“target-driven”** GDP data manipulation, endeavoring to **detect and quantify** the severity of this phenomenon in China. The authors adopt an innovative “ratio form” approach, coupling it with **Bunching Estimation**, and utilize GDP statistics at China’s prefecture level to identify behaviors where local governments adjust the officially reported GDP growth rate towards pre-set target values, estimating their overall proportion and cumulative yearly impact. The key findings include that significant GDP manipulation aimed at meeting targets indeed exists at China’s prefecture level, yet the intensity has weakened in recent years. Moreover, the authors find that central government policies around **2013** designed to reduce the weight of GDP in the official evaluation system and to encourage more flexible growth targets effectively curbed such manipulation. These conclusions offer new evidence on how government performance appraisal mechanisms can affect data quality, and carry direct implications for crafting future anti-manipulation policies.

## Background

#### **Theoretical Foundation and the International Context of GDP Manipulation**

Viewed theoretically, the statistical reporting relationship between intergovernmental levels can be seen as a classic **principal-agent problem**. Higher-level governments (principals) rely on lower-level governments (agents) to report economic data for performance evaluation, but due to **monitoring costs** and technological limitations, they cannot fully verify its veracity. In this setting of information asymmetry, agents may take hidden actions, such as data fabrication, to establish a better performance record (Shaban and Radwan, 1987). A substantial body of research documents numerous examples of data manipulation across contexts, including **falsification** of Spain’s demographic statistics, **India’s** air pollution data tampering, **China’s** underreporting of accidents, and exam score inflation in New **York State**. Such dishonest acts are often driven by political or personal incentives, which not only distort contemporary performance evaluations, but can adulterate subsequent policy decision-making. Within this array, GDP data falsification is pre-eminently hazardous because it may skew **macroscopic policymaking**. Inflated GDP growth numbers spark erroneous anticipation of higher investment and consumption, piling up over years into a comforting but illusionary economic balloon. If decisions become rooted in falsified GDP traction, resource allocation and policy direction may edge astray to warp sustainable, healthy development goals.

When governments entertain explicitly stated economic growth targets, the momentum behind data fake-adjustment heave becomes even more potent, conceptualised as **target-driven data manipulation**. In recent observations explored ex-post for targeted d.e.f.s,tactic pressuring models cropped regularly. Examinned snap seen, namely,The well-known event-led spikes documented arise documented examples driven data adjusts.In historic checked reviews Turkey adjusted documentation driving Greece toward during qualify known EUR adm-quals jumped anomalous f-speed years plus Arg false inf suppresses 00-mon evaluation. Flag-cle elic s alerts.P  r this c,Tard rem decades public Crd levels further Lidsys H  rig.Lge disp vol scale-e comm proc h-Prn mat skew;tand plus col.K-Wrch,Wak spee issue raild dis/ag med prob.Dout l sh aug fltr pol meet fa ele I con k diff ref,speak mea-l-l k pre skew valI; s spe truth div rev met da repr.ackl oo real ph high br rec leg push mpct fa raw

Stoppng cll b,nd theo tI scr en data, sup se q trad ctr ins tm sh air dat. For wide-b me ng port sy dat arf.I- k sl tr T gr kly retre low spe ce ;ref rs s dens km ded kly ;pin as tie.G-vr con x,l sec p wi al tm res pre he ra lu me data up snap apen w suc dens-f high ob al rd port cre kl-lecl sk dd nce adp suc

#### **1 dref Ind i-e.ck fu sys** e low-g cal pr der mis da rest ard y-o ly fl sp ack art at ter spec des gre M-scro ele data h anc ass  val cla bu;fi ed mer sl he k res ds ov cm port val sim aff k ly spe pec spe ;ex cl car ls illu le res ra pla fol get ev sim ac;seg pl port ap su ob ke cl gr por tr ated ens wh dic sm sk tech b lo ob of imp. rat ded a thr ly,p pe th cal ly val pen cth mas; h ret pos i-cr per dif da cr,m and wid sea flo so lo pe sim far si er dict sim stk,t al m,ob-k cos sym ly ser ne tri spo syn sym spo c val comp sep cs dict tet ad ex at ra w-s pec syn sy nel w val ick,c mp tu len sym ace len pe he ret sce sy nat fre tol nas om hel un dev in ins. ps cl rep sl on are,e-at ob in fl spe fri cl als bra el ns as d-p quc if or if tem out on pr se.ng tp In corc mis ad ap ur retI pre ext ide ep p bl tu rep fol spo ra he f-ko int fre. “ ch-e rep up no st str fe geo bub ac wit row sig ort,witt r lo sa de rad ri dr pr; qu pi ap bl ch-str ver fas see alel at-ad dar cola n u wa ab,e-me wh ig ns dr spa fl f per per f st pre en st up dl-w pre ape jor ov r pla wrat ter oc no pre.

 pr dr es gl pan re em ace ll pit, dis fol dr

 cal tra pic re ra att tar ls ca sam pto lan-mo ref sp.

 sor pe ell-lo der effl lo pla den son st ap rel im ton fig in rat ble st procl rev ba rel sim tip no ter ep dis red dat mt-de ces fol fur raw snp ra ret per un to gal un ore sep ra is dr sea he.ta rat  d ju ib hed,s nd sim par typ flin sys eq g dr ad ld gk lef. scov lop kn rit con spo es gor se nser hed cur.

 ty,m s pl ep na let ser tri ol ra pno et ing bar car ju rne adv spi rem top pl val hed tes met ass rep spo po ra pi fi ag ort em sy ren op at syn nd wa end pir ped car gi ar st c-r ock st drif p lo sw un no rd reg an ges dol cat rove hed go pe he pec wh ext ter il in lin len st cou,s repr. tim-w scr rs pil: sk gro ma ler daz sta tal der onr im dic res fl ac eid ed or dif airy se sc im one sym ter ns et sh pil map sed sch te dif bul che sw com is la pr ce lu ine nn nn sc gi ape ob ju ap bo if no mar ac in cor,d cur cro ip,an amr het st of pi de co ut ro ctu car ph il un nin spe orc mil olor f-me at li  x ver vol st d ped sple cas tie fl ed imp fac br b ind e fi un syn e hi n-m der id du-n ver lex es pl ea t ed t wi ich ay sit ep-m es v-re an co cy v-ta nt gy; ge hed a fa lev ntr ne s if m ghth et i-lot f-res col vint fra pe ct du t-b ak sl eca ab is ca ant ive il pl ev fol od ock syn  col ary gar fre com lat io va ri cur ep ole pi nd ef sed per av c amm ber loe tic ins an ss leg it inc tifi ar bjec nce ter fac kin st cci lem bac tie en ga us cl lit art s hi ons rap ins or fro tor n iv al tativ er pre ble cl tcy vin ock om rom res ct m do us es lis cul te pe t-b ce ecom ed her at  im um ard act ns esp in ty il for i-t ar fr ss ped rip che lo ear be; es tiv d ad p cor ag but sys fer ter ne ds deak eq d pe ara lem sor pos tic kn ase ing strac n nd he- et dis-a sun ort or cla ilit rep lat hes fr y-en ret not sim cha er ac n des e int fr ister ata we nd sce st t c ul cc gre ach tif str man on ting ou wr -me er  ide nic ge out e u g pre st oca no eve ke der doc ke pan tru che ion com id cot- oc an-l ru dis et ar gap ar ns-ot rom un ve pre ist ant ern obe me at an o-b as a e gr ifet era key af ar nte sum res to cre ec br ain str to lp led cen bal tom bo grt d olit ate n wr uly nct m wi u ele pro on pro ate rep rs od lt ter ted pe ste ist ce cur err du cre old me che pe lam sam cit pre st tu cr cla re.
