---
title: "Is Citizen Science Dead?"
date: 2021-07-16T23:00:00+08:00
category: { name: "Research Notes", slug: research }
tags: ["Citizen Science"]
summary: "Our world is polarized by social, economic, political, and environmental events."
---

Is Citizen Science Dead?

Christopher S. Lowry and Kristine F. Stepenuck

Our world is polarized by social, economic, political, and environmental events. When discussing scientific findings or recommendations, it is impossible not to provoke negative reactions and opposing views -- whether in informal interactions at the grocery store or during the review process of high-impact journals. As professional scientists, we are often distrusted by the public. This is partly due to our failure to communicate our work effectively, and also because we are committed to cultivating the industry of scientific research, which requires us to retain control over the direction of research and over authority. As a result, we typically push scientific findings onto the public without involving them in the generation of new knowledge. This raises the question of how citizen science fits into the scientific continuum. Fundamentally, citizen science allows professional scientists to combine with, and engage, non-professionals in producing scientific outcomes. This is a great opportunity to bridge the chasm, to promote collaboration and build trust between the two and within the broader scientific community. To achieve this, we must evaluate issues such as inclusivity, bias, exploitation, and utility that amplify inequality and restrict the implementation of and participation in citizen science. Without such action, it begs the question: "Is citizen science dead?"

Citizen science lacks inclusivity, as reflected in its nomenclature, recruitment strategies, the mechanisms by which the science is conducted, and even in the scientific problems being addressed. The term "citizen science" may be a driver of polarization, separating those who feel included from those who feel excluded. Those who participate in citizen science are often highly educated and affluent, lacking representation of the entire population, even though the field has been described as "public participation in scientific research" and other less divisive terms. Using any terminology that separates professional scientists from non-professionals to describe scientific work or outcomes creates an immediate chasm between the two, casting the authority of amateurs into question. The inclusivity of citizen science is also affected by project-specific requirements, including equipment, accessibility, time, ability, and classification of participants. The scientific questions being addressed may also exclude certain populations from the range of beneficiaries, such as those disproportionately affected by contamination. However, collaborative and cocreated citizen science models, in which scientists and non-professionals jointly develop and implement research, are examples of successful inclusive approaches. Take for instance the thousands of University Extension offices across the United States, which extend a university's knowledge and resources to communities and engage the public in research. In this process, academics build relationships with communities, advance the implementation of research topics, and ultimately solve local challenges.

The professionalization of science can lead to bias against citizen science. For example, **scientists may distrust amateur data collectors, even though they often rely heavily on students with limited training to collect "valid" data for their own research.** Issues of quality control in the data collection and analysis of citizen scientists, as well as ethical issues (such as how much effort scientists can ask of volunteers), are two of the most common arguments professional scientists make against using such data to support their research. Data quality problems grow exponentially in large-scale projects, where inconsistencies in spatial and temporal data collection, variability in training, and individual biases can all affect results; nevertheless, this may also be true for professional science that uses disparate data sets. Indeed, professional scientists are experts at quantifying uncertainty. On this basis, we must establish standards for error analysis in citizen science and help implement plans to identify possible sources of error. Existing models, similar to the EPA's quality assurance and documentation handbooks, can serve as guidance.

The lack of feedback from professionals, and the failure to acknowledge the public as valid scientific contributors in decision-making and peer-review processes, both give rise to feelings of being exploited. Furthermore, the public may be regarded merely as a tool for acquiring data, rather than as research collaborators. This devalues their contribution to the knowledge produced. This exploitative nature can lead to high turnover of volunteers and short project half-lives. While we know that the loop from citizen to professional science can only be closed when information is transferred in both directions, moving beyond the mindset of citizens as instruments is difficult and requires a significant investment of time to accomplish. One solution is to involve citizen scientists at the inception of the research and to include them throughout the scientific process. An active partnership is not only a way to close the loop but also a way to build relationships that can ultimately give citizen scientists equal footing to develop and disseminate information that meets local needs.

Finally, citizen science is not a one-size-fits-all model; it has certain practical limitations that differ from traditional scientific research, which demands different knowledge, skills, and actions from professional scientists. Some research questions require expensive and/or specialized equipment, which limits participation. Collaborating effectively with community members also takes time. Professional scientists must first build an awareness of the opportunities for incorporating community engagement into their research. After that, time is needed to recruit, train, support, and provide feedback to participants. Perhaps most importantly, time is needed to build relationships that foster trust, which may be the highest barrier to entry for professional scientists. Research trajectories may also diverge, with professional scientists focusing over longer timeframes on developing peer-reviewed publications (despite their longer shelf life), while citizen scientists value the short-term feedback offered through presentations or websites. This divergence can be attributed to a focus on process rather than product, which is even problematic in professional science. Acknowledging that citizen science is not perfect is not a complete solution; we must expand the opportunities for scientific discovery already evident in the peer-reviewed literature. Research conducted through Zooniverse EyeWire, eBird, the Large Hadron Collider, and CoCoRaHS demonstrates the impact and scalability of these projects.

If the issues of inclusivity, bias, exploitation, and utility are not addressed, citizen science may die, losing its place in the scientific continuum. Professional scientists can change this course. We must continually recognize our mission to improve the human condition while creating inclusive environments. We are accustomed to trading off the transformative and impactful nature of research, and citizen science is no exception. Engaging the public in science not only creates greater trust in science but also provides important observations, analyses, and perspectives. Recognizing the barriers to entry related to inclusivity, bias, exploitation, and utility is the first step toward addressing them. Targeted recruitment can increase the diversity of participation. Intentional project design and the development of quality assurance plans can reduce bias and address utility issues. Projects overcome barriers to development by building strong communities of practice through training, data visualization, and regular communication. At the highest standard, citizen science projects define their intended goals, the uses of the data, and data quality objectives. If we, as professional scientists, let barriers to entry such as inclusivity, bias, exploitation, and utility hold us back, citizen science will die.



Original source:

Lowry, C. S., & Stepenuck, K. F. (2021). Is Citizen Science Dead? *Environmental Science & Technology*, *55*(8). https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.0c07873
